Abstract
=======================

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is an umbrella term covering a plethora of progressive changes in executive functions, motor abilities, behavior, and/or language. This functional decline is linked with the neurodegeneration of frontal and/or temporal lobes due to diverse molecular pathologies. At the early stages, the accumulation of misfolded proteins targets specifically susceptible cell assemblies, leading to relatively focal neurodegeneration later spreading throughout large-scale cortical networks. Different clinical syndromes have thus been described in relation to atrophy localization, informing on the functional networks underlying specific cognitive, emotional and behavioural processes. 
In this chapter, we discuss the most recent clinical, neuropathological, imaging, and genetics findings in FTD-spectrum syndromes affecting the temporal lobe. We focus in particular on the semantic variant of Primary Progressive Aphasia and its mirror image, the right temporal variant of FTD. Incipient focal atrophy of the anterior temporal lobe (ATL) has been reliably associated with TDP-43 type C pathology and a spectrum of linguistic, emotional, and behavioral difficulties. In particular, cases with predominantly left ATL atrophy manifest with predominant naming, word comprehension, reading and object semantic deficits, while cases with predominantly right ATL atrophy with socio-emotional, nonverbal semantic and person-specific knowledge impairments. 
Overall, the observations in FTDs allow for crucial clinical-anatomic inferences shedding light onto the role of the temporal lobes in both cognition and complex behaviors. The concerted activity of both ATLs is critical to ensure that percepts are translated into concepts, yet important hemispheric differences should be acknowledged. On one hand, left ATL attributes meaning to linguistic, external stimuli thus supporting goal-oriented, action-related behaviors: e.g., integrating sounds and letters into words. On the other hand, the right ATL assigns meaning to emotional, visceral stimuli thus guiding socially relevant behaviors: e.g., integrating body sensations into feelings of familiarity. 